JOHN YANG: Good evening.
I'm John Yang.
On the "NewsHour" tonight:
President Trump
welcomes Egyptian president to
the White House,
as the administration signals
new U.S. priorities.
Also ahead this Monday: As the
Trump family's
role expands in the White House,
we look at
Jared Kushner and Ivanka Trump's
places in
the new administration.
GLENN THRUSH, The New York
Times: The Bush
White House, the Obama White
House were stocked
with experienced people who had
careers as
public servants.
Now, the Trumps came in with the
promise to
change that paradigm.
JOHN YANG: And combating India's
trash problem
-- how one company is trying to
reduce the
huge landfills that are wreaking
havoc on
India's most populous cities.
All that and more on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JOHN YANG: Good evening.
Judy Woodruff is on assignment
tonight.
The stage is now set for what's
likely to
be a bitter showdown on the
Senate floor over
Supreme Court nominee Neil
Gorsuch.
He cleared the Judiciary
Committee today,
but it came as Democrats secured
41 votes
against him.
That means Republicans won't get
the votes
they need to break a filibuster.
Republican Lindsey Graham warned
that his
side will change Senate rules to
allow confirmation
with a simple majority.
SEN.
LINDSEY GRAHAM (R), South
Carolina: Senate
traditions are going to change
over this man,
based on the times in which we
live.
And I find it ironic and sad
that we're going
to change rules over somebody
who's lived
such a good life, who's been
such a good judge
for such a long time.
JOHN YANG: Democrats, like
Patrick Leahy,
said Gorsuch is too
pro-corporation and too
conservative.
SEN.
PATRICK LEAHY (D), Vermont: I
cannot vote
solely to protect an institution
when the
rights of hardworking Americans
are at risk,
because I fear that the Senate I
would be
defending no longer exists.
I must first and foremost vote
my conscience
both today and later this week.
JOHN YANG: Republican leaders
say a confirmation
vote will come by Friday.
President Trump welcomed his
Egyptian counterpart,
Abdel Fattah El-Sisi, to the
White House today.
The Obama administration had
kept El-Sisi
at arm's length over human
rights abuses.
Today, Mr. Trump hailed the
Egyptian leader,
and the two men talked about
fighting terrorism
and helping Egypt's faltering
economy.
We will have a full report on
the changing
relationship after the news
summary.
In St. Petersburg, Russia, a
subway bombing
killed at least 11 people and
injured dozens
of others.
A second bomb was defused
nearby.
Investigators are treating it as
a terrorist
attack, possibly linked to
Islamist militants.
Amateur video captured the scene
moments after
the blast, with people rushing
to safety.
Witnesses told of chaos and
shock.
WOMAN (through translator): When
we were climbing
out, the train carriage
collapsed, all of
it.
Everything went black.
When I turned back and looked,
there was a
huge number of people lying
there.
There were dead bodies.
It was scary.
And when we left, they took out
several people
covered in blood.
JOHN YANG: Russian President
Vladimir Putin
was in St. Petersburg at the
time.
Hours later, he laid flowers at
the scene.
In Washington, President Trump
called the
bombing absolutely a terrible
thing.
In Colombia, the death toll from
a devastating
flood and mudslide has risen to
262.
It happened late Friday in the
southern city
of Mocoa, after more than five
inches of rain
fell in one night.
Workers are using heavy
machinery to clear
the thick mud and debris, so
rescue crews
can search for victims.
Officials say deforestation
helped cause the
disaster.
Back in this country, a new wave
of severe
weather threatened the Deep
South from Mississippi
to South Carolina.
The same system generated
tornadoes and torrential
rains in Louisiana and
Mississippi on Sunday.
At least four people were
killed.
In Augusta, Georgia, today,
storms forced
the suspension of a practice
round for the
Masters golf tournament.
Facebook, Mozilla and others
have announced
a $14 million initiative to
fight fake news.
It follows allegations of
rampant Russian
disinformation during last
year's presidential
campaign.
Judy Woodruff spoke exclusively
today with
Facebook COO Sheryl Sandberg as
part of a
longer interview to air later on
the "NewsHour."
JUDY WOODRUFF: How concerned are
you that
Facebook was used this way by an
adversary
of this country?
SHERYL SANDBERG, COO, Facebook:
There are
investigations of what happened
in the U.S.
elections that I think was going
on for a
long time.
False news is a problem across
the board.
And it comes from all kinds of
sources.
And we know it's bad for our
communities and
our governments and our
citizens.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Is it fair to say
that Facebook
underestimated the ability of a
foreign government
to do something like this?
SHERYL SANDBERG: We know that
seeing accurate
news on Facebook is really
important to people
on all sides.
No matter who you are, seeing
the accurate
story and seeing a diversity of
opinions is
really important.
We know we have a
responsibility, along with
news rooms and classrooms and
academic and
other companies, to make sure
people see accurate
news.
So we're working on a lot of
different levels.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Is it fair to say
Facebook
was caught off-guard by this, by
the magnitude
of this?
SHERYL SANDBERG: As we have
grown, so much
has changed in the world.
So much has changed about the
way people share
with their friends.
So much has changed about the
way people share
with their families, and the way
people share
articles and the kind of
articles people are
writing has changed.
And it's up to us to work with
everyone involved,
so that we can make sure people
see accurate
news on Facebook, because that's
what they
want and that's what we want.
JUDY WOODRUFF: When you say
you're moving
to disrupt the financial
incentive, how are
you doing that?
SHERYL SANDBERG: A lot of false
news is financially
motivated.
People are trying to make money
off this.
And so we are making sure that
people who
are doing false news can't
participate in
our advertising network, so that
they can't
get money from our ads for doing
this.
We're also making sure that
people writing
these articles can't use our ad
system to
advertise their content and get
more traffic.
JOHN YANG: Facebook's initiative
on fake news
will be based out of the City
University of
New York.
President Trump is donating his
first quarter's
salary to the National Park
Service.
A check for $78,333 was
presented at today's
White House briefing.
It came as the president's
budget calls for
cutting overall interior
spending by more
than $1.5 billion.
On Wall Street today, the Dow
Jones industrial
average lost close to -- it lost
13 points
to close at 20650.
The Nasdaq fell 17 points, and
the S&P 500
dipped nearly four.
And the University of South
Carolina is celebrating
today after winning its first
ever national
championship in women's
basketball.
They beat Mississippi State
67-55.
South Carolina took home the
title, despite
Mississippi State's stunning
upset over the
University of Connecticut,
snapping the Huskies'
streak of 111 consecutive --
that's a record
for men or women -- and four
straight national
titles.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
a sign of
changing relations, President
Trump meets
with the head of Egypt; and who
are the Kushners,
the first family turned
presidential advisers>;
our Politics Monday duo looks
ahead to the
upcoming battle over Supreme
Court nominee
Neil Gorsuch; and much more.
President Trump gave a ringing
endorsement
to the president of Egypt today.
Chief foreign affairs
correspondent Margaret
Warner begins our coverage.
MARGARET WARNER: In a sharp
departure from
his predecessor, President Trump
today did
what President Obama never
would, welcome
Egypt's President Abdel Fattah
El-Sisi to
the White House.
DONALD TRUMP, President of the
United States:
You have a great friend and ally
in the United
States and in me.
MARGARET WARNER: Mr. Trump made
it clear he's
rebooting the U.S.-Egypt
relationship to focus
on fighting terrorism.
DONALD TRUMP: I just want to let
everybody
know, in case there was any
doubt, that we
are very much behind President
El-Sisi.
He's done a fantastic job in a
very difficult
situation.
We are very much behind Egypt
and the people
of Egypt.
MARGARET WARNER: The Egyptian
leader, facing
an Islamist insurgency in Sinai,
welcomed
the president's words.
ABDEL FATTAH EL-SISI, Egyptian
President:
Since we met last September, I
have had a
deep appreciation and admiration
of your unique
personality, especially as
you're standing
very strong in the
counterterrorism field.
Your excellency, very strongly
and very openly,
you will find Egypt and myself
always beside
you in this.
MARGARET WARNER: Then Commanding
General El-Sisi
first assumed the presidency in
2013, when
he ousted the elected president,
Mohammed
Morsi, after mass protests
against Morsi's
rule.
A harsh crackdown ensued on the
now-banned
Muslim Brotherhood, opposition
figures, journalists
and others, leaving more than
1,000 dead.
Tens of thousands more,
including some Americans,
were imprisoned, and many NGOs
have been banned.
El-Sisi won his own election in
2014.
But President Obama shunned him,
and froze
military aid to Egypt for two
years.
Today, Mr. Trump made no public
mention of
human rights, noting only that
there are -- quote
-- "a few things" -- unquote --
that Washington
and Cairo don't agree on.
And in a break with Mr. Trump's
track record
so far, they didn't hold a joint
news conference,
precluding any unwelcome
questions on the
subject.
Later, White House Press
Secretary Sean Spicer
wouldn't say whether human
rights came up
during the private discussions.
SEAN SPICER, White House Press
Secretary:
That's best discussed privately
in terms of
how we address areas that need
to be discussed
like that in order to make
progress on them.
I don't think that should be a
huge surprise.
MARGARET WARNER: Egypt currently
receives
$1.3 billion in annual U.S.
military assistance.
It's unclear if that will
survive the White
House call for deep cuts in
foreign aid.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Margaret Warner.
JOHN YANG: So, how much of a
foreign policy
shift does today's meeting
represent?
For that, we turn to Michele
Dunne.
She has had a 17-year career at
the State
Department, where she focused on
Middle East
policy.
She's now director of the Middle
East Program
at the Carnegie Endowment for
International
Peace.
Michele, thanks so much for
joining us.
By deemphasizing human rights
and trying to
-- as he -- as the
administration officials
are saying, reboot this
relationship, what
is President Trump trying to
accomplish?
What is he trying to get out of
this?
MICHELE DUNNE, Carnegie
Endowment for International
Peace: Well, I think what
President Trump
wants is to construct a kind of
alliance of
Sunni Arab leaders, because Sisi
is one of
several.
There was the -- the Iraqi prime
minister
was here in Washington very
recently, as was
the deputy crown prince of Saudi
Arabia.
And then right after President
Sisi will be
the king of Jordan.
So, I think that President Trump
has the idea
of sort of rallying Sunni Arab
leaders to
be used in various ways, whether
against ISIS,
against Iran, possibly in some
sort of peace
effort toward Israel.
So I think that's how he sees
Egypt fitting
in.
JOHN YANG: And is he trying to
deemphasize
at least the public comments and
rhetoric
on human rights in order to
focus on this
fight on ISIS?
MICHELE DUNNE: Well, yes,
clearly, that's
the case.
But I want to point out, John,
that's not
really new.
When I think back to the
beginning of President
Obama's presidency, when Mubarak
was still
in power in Egypt, Obama did
something very
similar.
Obama thought that George W.
Bush had been
too critical of Mubarak on human
rights and
that he had wrecked the
relationship.
So, Obama sort of reset the
button with Mubarak
back at that time.
It's not unusual for a new
president to do
this.
What I think, though, that
President Trump
is going to figure out in time
is that the
situation inside Egypt, human
rights abuses
at a very high level, much
higher than under
Mubarak, political repression
and a really
disastrous economic situation,
all of these
are really going to affect what
kind of an
ally Egypt can be to the United
States and
what kind of things we can do
together against
these regional problems such as
terrorism.
JOHN YANG: Last week,
administration officials
in preparation for this visit
were telling
us that they felt that it was
better to talk
about human rights questions
privately and
discreetly.
They said that was the way they
felt they
could get the best results, best
chances for
success.
What do you think about that?
MICHELE DUNNE: Well, we will
see.
I would say it's been tried
before and that
the two previous administrations
did try raising
things privately and,
eventually, out of frustration,
went a little bit more public.
And even in both of the last
administrations,
they ended up withdrawing,
withholding or
suspending certain kinds of aid
specifically
out of concerns about human
rights issues,
because they saw, at the end of
the day, that
that wasn't separate from the
stability of
Egypt or Egypt's role in the
region, that
it was all tied up together.
JOHN YANG: Senators Lindsey
Graham and John
McCain have talked about putting
restrictions
on aid to Egypt because of human
rights.
Do you think Congress will step
in and maybe
tie the president's hands a bit?
MICHELE DUNNE: Well, yes,
absolutely.
Congress has a lot to say,
particularly when
it comes to assistance, and some
of the senators
you mentioned and others have
already sent
a signal.
They put out a letter shortly --
a resolution,
rather, shortly before Sisi's
visit.
And some of them have made press
statements
about there's a big crackdown on
NGOs in Egypt
and so forth.
And they have indicated that
they will continue
to seek conditions on aid and
possibly even
a cutting of aid.
And, by the way, John, I thought
one of the
most interesting things that
happened today
during this visit was an unnamed
administration
officials told a news service
that President
Sisi, you know, has come seeking
an increase
in aid, and he's going to be
disappointed.
JOHN YANG: Well, talk about
that.
What is President El-Sisi
looking for out
of this relationship?
MICHELE DUNNE: Well, look,
President El-Sisi,
as I mentioned, he faces a
difficult situation
inside of Egypt.
He's much less popular than he
was.
People are starting to talk
about even whether
the military leadership is
pleased with him,
whether they will want him to
run for president
again next year when his term
ends.
So, I think he's looking to show
Egyptians
and especially show the Egyptian
military
that he can keep the
relationship with the
United States solid, he can keep
the aid coming
in.
But, as we saw from the Trump
budget, they're
considering cutting a lot of
this aid or converting
it to loans, instead of grants.
So that wouldn't serve Sisi's
purpose at all.
And the Trump administration is
putting out
hints that it may be going in
that direction.
JOHN YANG: Michele Dunne, thanks
so much for
coming in and talking with us
about this.
MICHELE DUNNE: Thanks, John.
It was a pleasure.
JOHN YANG: Thanks.
Jared Kushner, President Trump's
senior adviser
and son-in-law, was in Iraq
today.
He was invited on the trip by
Joint Chiefs
chairman General Joseph Dunford.
The trip marks his first visit
to Iraq.
He was joined by Tom Bossert,
the president's
homeland security adviser.
And the three met with Iraqi and
American
officials to assess the fight
against ISIS.
The trip highlights the
expanding West Wing
role of both Kushner and his
wife, Ivanka
Trump.
The Trump White House is a
family affair.
Senior adviser and son-in-law
Jared Kushner
has emerged as a key West Wing
figure.
This week, his ever-expanding
role is on display.
In addition to his Iraq trip,
he's a key planner
of President Trump's upcoming
summit with
President Xi Jinping.
His wife, Ivanka Trump, is now
an official
member of the White House staff
and assistant
to the president.
White House officials say she
will focus on
issues like women's economic
empowerment and
getting more women into science
and technology.
Earlier, she said she would pass
up an official
role.
QUESTION: People think that
you're going to
be part of the administration,
Ivanka.
IVANKA TRUMP, Daughter of Donald
Trump: I'm
-- no, I'm going to be a
daughter, but I have
said throughout the campaign
that I am very
passionate about certain issues
and that I
want to fight for them.
So, there are a lot of things
that I feel
deeply, strongly about, but not
in a formal
administrative capacity.
JOHN YANG: Married in 2009, the
couple were
key members of the campaign's
inner circle.
DONALD TRUMP, President of the
United States:
Jared is a very successful real
estate person,
but I actually think he likes
politics more
than he likes real estate.
I'm excited.
And he's very good at politics.
JOHN YANG: Their increased
visibility comes
as the young administration has
run into significant
hurdles.
GLENN THRUSH, The New York
Times: The reason
why I think they are starting to
increase
their footprint in the West Wing
and East
Wing is pretty simple.
Everything is going wrong.
And there are a lot of power
vacuums.
The question, I think, what do
these New Yorkers
bring to the table?
Both Ivanka and Jared are not
people who have
had a lot of experience.
They don't have a lot of passion
for public
policy.
They just don't have a history
of that.
JOHN YANG: Ethics watchdogs say
their unpaid
government service may be filled
with conflicts.
Newly released financial
disclosure forms
show that Ivanka Trump has a
stake in the
Trump Hotel in Washington, D.C.,
of as much
as $25 million.
The couple still benefits from
their $740
million real estate and
investment business.
Her jewelry and clothing lines
are currently
held in trust.
In a statement, Ivanka Trump
said: "I have
been working closely and in good
faith with
the White House counsel and my
personal counsel
to address the unprecedented
nature of my
role."
Former associates say Kushner
could be a secret
weapon for Mr. Trump.
KEN KURSON, New York Observer:
One of his
greatest strengths is how much
people underestimate
him.
Not only is he young, and
soft-spoken, and
polite and very good-looking,
but he also
carries himself in a way that
sort of allows
people to think they're going to
potentially
get something over on him, and
then the next
thing they know, he's done just
fine for himself
and his stakeholders.
JOHN YANG: Even before last
week's announcement,
Ivanka Trump was granted a
high-level security
clearance and had a seat at the
table with
world leaders.
The couple and their three
children live in
a rented $5.5 million D.C.
mansion, where
their neighborhoods include
former President
Barack Obama and Secretary of
State Rex Tillerson.
Like his father-in-law,
36-year-old Kushner
was born into a real estate
family and took
the business into Manhattan.
He took over his family's
company after his
father was jailed for tax
evasion and other
offenses.
He graduated from Harvard and
got a joint
law and business degree from New
York University.
He also owned The New York
Observer.
When he joined the
administration, he resigned
from all professional roles and
announced
he would sell the paper to a
family trust.
Like her father, Ivanka Trump,
who is 35,
graduated from the University of
Pennsylvania's
Wharton School of Business.
After a brief stint as a model,
she joined
the Trump organization,
eventually becoming
an executive vice president.
This is their first foray into
politics and
government.
GLENN THRUSH: The Bush White
House, the Obama
White House were stocked with
experienced
people who had careers as public
servants.
Now, the Trumps came in with the
promise to
change that paradigm and make
the White House
function more along the lines of
a business.
But, remember, these are not
enormously successful
businesspeople.
JOHN YANG: As their profiles and
influence
rise, so do reports of tensions
with chief
strategist Stephen Bannon and
some of the
populist conservatives in the
West Wing.
White House officials deny any
friction, calling
Kushner the ultimate team
player.
Outside critics noted that
Ivanka and Kushner
were on a family ski trip when
the president's
attempt to repeal and replace
the Affordable
Care Act faltered.
White House officials say it was
not an issue
either of them was working on.
Kushner's also been caught up in
the investigation
of ties between the Trump circle
and Russia.
He's agreed to meet with the
Senate Intelligence
Committee about arranging
meetings with Russian
officials during the transition.
Whether President Trump's bet on
his family
pays off is an open question.
Given how close they are to Mr.
Trump, White
House officials say they are
crucial to the
president's success.
JOHN YANG: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour":
solutions to
India's growing garbage problem;
in search
of a fairer America, a selection
from the
"NewsHour" bookshelf; and we
visit an Irish
poet's monthly variety show.
But, first, for more on Jared
Kushner's role
in the White House, the fight
over Supreme
Court nominee Neil Gorsuch and
the week ahead
for President Trump, it's time
for Politics
Monday with Amy Walter of The
Cook Political
Report and Tamara Keith of NPR.
So, we just heard a little
discussion about
the role that Jared Kushner and
Ivanka Trump
are playing in the West Wing.
What do you make of this, of
this sort of
increased role for this very
young couple?
TAMARA KEITH, National Public
Radio: Well,
and Jared Kushner especially has
sort of an
amorphous and growing portfolio.
He's liaising with the Mexican
government.
He's preparing for the visit
from President
Xi from China.
He's off in Iraq.
And he's supposed to lead this
task force,
SWAT team to potentially
completely reshape
the federal government and find
deficiencies.
That's a lot and it's a unique
role.
But, you know, unlike other
advisers who are
jockeying for a position in this
White House,
it's hard to fire your
son-in-law.
AMY WALTER, The Cook Political
Report: Right.
It would be a little awkward.
He probably still could do that.
But, you know, every president
does get to
come in with someone or multiple
people who
are the closest to them who they
trust to
only be looking out for them.
This is a vicious town.
A lot of knives are out.
You need someone that always has
your back.
President Obama had Valerie
Jarrett, who came
from Chicago.
She was for him.
She stayed with him throughout
the entire
course of his presidency.
She didn't have a portfolio
quite as big as
his, but it was a pretty diverse
portfolio.
And you would see her show up in
places that
were important to the president,
always looking
out for the president's
interests.
The question in my mind is not
so much what
are they doing, but can they do
something,
right?
Are we going to see success or
any change
or anything come out of this big
portfolio?
And that's where I would be
spending a lot
more time focusing, not so much
the fact that
he went to Iraq, but is there
going to be
a change in the way that the
administration
deals with Iraq?
Is there going to be a way that
is going to
be different about what happens
with China
or these other measures of this
portfolio?
That is much more significant
than the fact
that he's actually sitting
there.
TAMARA KEITH: And he was invited
by the chairman
of the Joint Chiefs of Staff,
which gives
an indication that the chairman
of the Joint
Chiefs of Staff might feel that
this is a
good way to get a message to the
president,
that, if he can deliver
information to a person
who has the president's ear,
that is a way
of getting into that inner
circle.
AMY WALTER: Yes.
JOHN YANG: And having him go out
there, he
is essentially serving as the
president's
eyes and ears.
AMY WALTER: That's right.
Remember, the Joint Chiefs gets
to sit with
Jared Kushner, the person the
Times Square
closest to the president, for 16
straight
hours.
That's a lot of time to do some
lobbying.
JOHN YANG: So, now the -- Neil
Gorsuch cleared
the Senate Judiciary Committee,
but we have
really set the stage for this
fight over filibusters,
over how many votes it takes to
get a Supreme
Court nominee.
How ugly is this going to get,
Tam?
TAMARA KEITH: The Senate is
already on a path
to the nuclear option.
They started on that path when
Harry Reid
and the Democrats decided to do
the nuclear
option for other presidential
appointees,
other judicial nominations, up
to, but not
including the Supreme Court.
Now, they said they had to do
that because
of the observation of Mitch
McConnell, who
was then in the minority.
So, we were headed here.
This was a collision course.
And we were going to get there
eventually,
whether it was this nominee or
the next nominee.
AMY WALTER: Yes.
And I would argue it has been a
collision
course that has been set even
far before 2013,
the hollowing out of moderates
in Congress,
the fact that there are no
longer Southern
Democrats, Northeastern
Republicans, folks
who are willing to cross party
lines.
The whole reason you have the
60-vote threshold
was really to build consensus.
But there is no ability to build
consensus.
There is no reward you get as a
politician
now to crossing party lines, to
being a bipartisan
deal-maker.
In fact, it brings you two
things, one, a
likely primary challenge from
your left or
your right, and it ensures that
you have a
harder time raising money from
the donors
who are excited about the
polarization and
the partisanship.
And I totally agree we were
headed here anyway.
If it were not with Gorsuch, it
would be if,
in the next two years, we had
another Supreme
Court opening, we would have
seen that fight
there.
So I think all bets are off.
JOHN YANG: Is this going to
change the Senate,
or is the Senate already
changed?
AMY WALTER: I think this is
where the Senate
has been going.
I don't see this -- look, the
real change
would be if we do see more and
more opportunities
for getting rid of the
filibuster in traditional
legislative business.
And it feels as if we're headed
there, too.
TAMARA KEITH: That it just
started to snowball.
There are a lot of
institutionalists in the
Senate, senators who are very
sad about this.
But there was a tiny effort at a
nuclear disarmament,
and it really didn't go
anywhere.
And if you want to know what
this can do,
look at President Trump's
Cabinet picks.
This is the first president
post-nuclear option
to name his Cabinet.
And someone like Betsy DeVos
simply wouldn't
have been confirmed if there had
been the
filibuster.
Somebody like a Scott Pruitt at
the EPA wouldn't
have been confirmed.
Simply, there wouldn't have been
60 votes
for those people.
But the president didn't have to
find consensus
candidates because he knew that
he only needed
51 votes.
JOHN YANG: In the grand
tradition of Friday
night document dumps, we got the
financial
disclosure forms for the Trump
administration.
What did we find?
What did we learn?
AMY WALTER: I don't know that we
learned anything
new.
We learned that there are some
really wealthy
people that are in this
administration.
You pointed out in your piece
the connection
of the Kushners with the Trump
properties.
But I think for folks who
already believe
that there is too much of a
connection between
the Trump business and Trump
administration,
those came true in this.
But I think, at the end of the
day, for Democrats
and those who are opposed to
Donald Trump,
the idea that just because you
have wealthy
people in your administration is
going to
make people fear that those
folks aren't going
to look out for the interests of
non-wealthy
people isn't on mark.
I think what we have to wait and
see is, what
do their policies do for people
who don't
have all of this money?
If indeed, at the end of the
day, what we
find is the policies that Trump
are putting
forward or passing only benefit
a small section
of America, those who are the
wealthiest,
then that argument will hold
water.
If they pass middle-class tax
cuts, if they
do things to help lower-income
Americans,
it is going to be harder to make
that argument.
TAMARA KEITH: And people who
wanted to make
the argument could point to the
health care
bill that cut taxes on the
wealthy and would
have cut Medicaid substantially.
AMY WALTER: That's right.
TAMARA KEITH: Had many people
saying, wait,
the president ran as a populist.
What is this health care bill?
AMY WALTER: That's right.
JOHN YANG: But people earned a
lot of money
last year in the Trump
administration.
There were a lot of big
paychecks.
One aide got a free wedding
dress from a reality
TV show.
They are just sort of -- I don't
know that
there's any grand policies
things you can
glean from these things.
They're just sort of very
interesting little
nuggets about the people that
he's chosen
to be in the White House.
TAMARA KEITH: This is an
administration like
no other.
Now, what supporters of
President Trump will
say is that's what he ran for.
That's what he said.
He said, I'm a super rich guy.
Other rich people have run for
president before,
and they sort of ran away from
their wealth
or didn't flaunt it.
He said, I'm a rich guy, I'm
going to bring
my rich friends, and we're going
to change
the government.
JOHN YANG: And we will see how
they do.
AMY WALTER: Right.
JOHN YANG: Amy Walter, Tamara
Keith, thanks
joining us, Politics Monday.
TAMARA KEITH: You're welcome.
JOHN YANG: Now: a look at how
the world's
second most populous country is
trying to
deal with pollution.
Special correspondent Fred de
Sam Lazaro looks
at how Delhi, India, is trying
to cope with
tons of municipal waste in a
city of more
than 20 million.
Fred's report is part of our
Breakthrough
series.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: In India's
capital, new
housing sprawls as far as the
eye can see,
a symbol of the world's fastest
growing major
economy.
There also are towering symbols
of the environmental
cost of all this.
Just look for the birds.
Under thousands of hovering
vultures are the
city's landfills.
This is one of three covering
some 70 acres
in a low-income area called
Ghazipur.
I'm standing near the top of the
Ghazipur
landfill site, an accumulation
by now of more
than 10 million tons of waste.
It's more than 10 stories high.
Behind me, it towers over the
surrounding
skyline.
And trucks are all around here,
bringing in
an additional 2,000 tons of
unsorted garbage
every day.
MAHESH BABU, Business Owner: You
can't dump
more in that mountain there.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Mahesh Babu
heads an infrastructure
company that's been contracted
by Delhi's
government to tackle a trash
problem that
he says is a crisis at many
levels.
MAHESH BABU: Keep in mind Delhi
is on the
seismic zone.
So, you are really...
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: If you had
an earthquake
here, God forbid.
MAHESH BABU: Yes.
You have an earthquake, you will
have that
mound just sliding down.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: And even
without an earthquake,
he says the festering garbage is
toxic.
Methane from the dump explodes
daily in dozens
of spontaneous fires that spew
toxins into
the air, while a stew of heavy
metals and
organic and inorganic pollutants
washes into
the soil when it rains and into
Delhi's main
river.
MAHESH BABU: Yes, the dark
liquid right here
is what we call leachate.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Babu showed
me a sample
of this so-called leachate.
MAHESH BABU: What we do is
basically treat
it, so that it removes all the
toxic impurities.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: But of the
millions of
tons that are not treated yet,
this is the
stuff that's going into the
Yamuna River.
MAHESH BABU: Especially during
monsoon.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: The
centerpiece of his
company's approach is a year-old
$60 million
power plant that converts waste
to energy,
which is sent to the electric
grid.
It is ramping up to burn 2,000
tons of trash
per day, which means the city
may not need
to add to the landfill, though
it won't immediately
reduce its size.
MAHESH BABU: India has close to
50 cities
which are more than a million
people.
So, waste energy of this kind
makes a lot
of sense in those kind of
settings.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: This isn't
the first attempt
at creating energy from waste.
And previous ones haven't
worked, says Delhi-based
environmental activist Sunita
Narain.
SUNITA NARAIN, Environmental
Activist: The
key reason for failure has been
the inability
to sort and segregate the waste
which is then
used for incineration.
Now, if you don't sort and
segregate adequately,
you both have very toxic
emissions that come
out of the plant, but you also
have very poor
quality of fuel that is
generated.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Ideally that
kind of sorting
should happen in homes,
organics, metals,
paper and plastics.
But Narain says there's a
cultural hurdle.
Waste has been the domain of
people on the
lowest rung of the age-old
social hierarchy,
or caste system, not the middle
classes who
generate most of it.
SUNITA NARAIN: We are a
caste-ist society.
And we would like to treat waste
as somebody
else's problems.
You get it out of your home, and
then somebody
else deals with it.
The state is never asking us to
segregate.
And it doesn't put the onus and
the responsibility
on households.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Instead, the
government
pays a higher rate for
electricity coming
out of the Ghazipur plant, so
workers can
be hired to segregate the refuse
when it gets
here.
But once sorted, Babu says,
there's plenty
of added value.
MAHESH BABU: We're looking at
converting biodegradables
into organic fertilizer.
The combustibles, we convert
into energy.
So the idea is really to glean
as much value
as possible from this.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: In time, he
says, there
are plans by his company and
others to chip
away at the landfill and
actually reduce its
size, repurposing some of the
waste as road
construction material, for
instance.
At the plant, combustible trash
is dried and
incinerated.
Babu says the effluent passes
through sophisticated
filters and scrubbers.
MAHESH BABU: Our particulate
matter is less
than 10 parts per million, which
is the standard
in Europe.
So, because we're located so
close to these
houses here, the idea is to
ensure that whatever
comes out of our stack is
absolutely clean
and clear.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Neighbors
invited to the
power plant say they have
already seen an
improvement since it became
operational, a
massive buffer between their
homes and the
dump site.
MAN (through translator):
Before, you got
out of the house and looked at a
huge pile
of garbage.
Now we look at this.
WOMAN (through translator): It
really was
unbearable during the rainy
season.
It was so smelly and dirty.
Now we can even have the door
open and sit
outside.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: But for
another nearby
community, the power plant
represents a threat.
Hundreds of so-called rag
pickers forage for
plastics, glass and any reusable
items they
can sell, risking their health
and the wrath
of authorities to eke out a
livelihood.
They're not legally supposed to
be here.
For them, the company has set up
a preschool
and an arts and craft center.
The petals of discarded flowers
from a nearby
florist are used to create
greeting cards
and other artwork.
Mahesh Babu hopes more rag
pickers will choose
the new alternative.
He says helping these
marginalized people
is in his company's interest.
MAHESH BABU: We believe that,
unless they
are mainstreamed, the
profitability of the
main project is always under a
cloud.
Everywhere possible, we have
tried to integrate
people into our mainstream
project itself,
so that then they have a sense
of ownership.
Otherwise, we have a number of
people who
will and try to bring the
project to a halt.
But if they are part of the
project, the chances
of success increase
exponentially.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: In the long
term, he and
environmentalists agree that
projects like
this have to succeed, and that
will require
a broad cultural shift.
The country has no more room to
bury its trash,
Babu says, and runs of risk of
being buried
by it.
For the "PBS NewsHour," this is
Fred de Sam
Lazaro in New Delhi.
JOHN YANG: Fred's reporting is a
partnership
with the Under-Told Stories
Project at the
University of St. Thomas in
Minnesota.
Now: a new book by the one-time
manager of
John F. Kennedy's 1960 campaign
in West Virginia,
a founder of the Peace Corps and
the editor
of the storied Washington
Monthly.
Charles Peters takes on modern
America in
"We Do Our Part: Toward a Fairer
and More
Equal America."
Here again is Judy Woodruff, who
sat down
with Peters recently and asked
him, why this
book, why now?
CHARLES PETERS, Author, "We Do
Our Part: Toward
a Fairer and More Equal
America": I was terribly
concerned about the things that
had taken
us apart, from a country that
was relatively
together during the time I was
growing up.
The Franklin Roosevelt era, I
would say, lasted
roughly until 1965.
Not only were incomes becoming
more equal,
but the country was becoming
more equal, in
the sense that blacks were
achieving legal
rights that they had never
known.
And our Jewish prejudice was
radically diminished
by the mid-'60s.
And our Catholic prejudice
almost disappeared.
So, it was a country that seemed
to be coming
together.
And then just a few years later,
the Vietnam
War began to split us apart.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You launched a
magazine in
the late 1960s, you said,
because you wanted
to look at what the federal
government was
doing right, and what it was
doing wrong,
how it could do better.
But you soon expanded that to
look at the
whole country.
CHARLES PETERS: We felt we had
to get into
those broader cultural issues.
But the main thing that happened
was the snobbery
that began with the anti-war
movement.
That was, I think, one of two
really bad things
that happened to divide the
country.
The other was the growth of
greed and the
conspicuous consumption that
fueled the greed.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Snobbery.
CHARLES PETERS: Yes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: It's not a word
that's thrown
out a lot.
CHARLES PETERS: Yes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What did you --
who do you
mean by what happened?
CHARLES PETERS: In the anti-war
movement,
there was a feeling that the
people who were
against the war were morally
superior to those
who were for the war.
Well, I was against the war, but
I understood
there were an awful lot of good
people who
believed in the war.
That's when I began to worry
about what was
going wrong with the anti-war
movement, even
though I was part of the
anti-war movement.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You point out a
number of ways
in which the country, for all of
its progress,
has gone downhill.
CHARLES PETERS: Yes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And another way
is, you cite
the greed that you saw crop up
among people
in Washington who came here
originally to
do public service, but then that
changed.
CHARLES PETERS: Even though it
contained that
element of snobbery, that was
also a beautiful
element of idealism in the
anti-war movement.
But that gradually changed in
the '70s.
I think part of it was simply
these people
were getting older.
The V.W.
Beetle was no longer the
adequate car.
They had to get the station
wagon, and then
they had to get the house.
But then they got the house.
And then they got -- it had to
be a larger
house, and it had to have a
workout room,
and it had to have a home
office, and it had
to have walk-in closets and
state-of-the-art
bathroom and kitchen.
And, suddenly, people were into
thinking they
needed a lot of money.
And then they forgot about the
wages paid
to the worker.
They became concerned with
increasing their
dividends, meaning increasing
profits.
And when they read about a plant
closing,
well, that might increase
profit, you know?
And we have got to watch those
wages, because
wages take away from profit.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You see running
through this
entire book, Charlie Peters, a
cautionary
tale, especially for Democrats,
I think, who
have argued that they are the
party of the
working people, that they are
the party of
equal rights, equal access, of
tolerance.
CHARLES PETERS: Yes.
Yes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But you're saying
something
was eating away at that from the
inside.
CHARLES PETERS: Yes.
Yes.
The shame of that is, in many
ways, the Democrats
were becoming more inclusive,
more generous.
They were including the causes
of gays.
They were including the cause of
immigrants.
And so they're far more generous
towards those
people than the Republicans in
general.
So, there was much that was
going on that
was in the best of the
Democrats.
But this failure on wages, the
failure to
concern themselves with the
interest of the
worker, this is where the
liberals failed.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Much of the theme
of the book,
it seems to me, is how the
Democratic Party
has let you down, that you
thought there was
-- that the party could do
better than it's
done.
CHARLES PETERS: It's let the
country down
in that respect.
But I am still a Democrat, proud
to be a Democrat.
I -- on the whole, we're on the
right side.
But in these two ways of getting
too involved
with making money ourselves --
we're too involved
in thinking we're a little bit
better than
the other guy.
When they were
environmentalists, they didn't
think, whose jobs are this going
to cost?
If they worked for a certain
trade policy,
they didn't think, who is this
going to cost,
and what can I do to help those
people this
is going to hurt?
JUDY WOODRUFF: It's an
indictment of Hillary
Clinton.
CHARLES PETERS: Yes.
Unfortunately, yes.
The key symbolic thing that is
going to happen
now is what Barack Obama decides
to do with
the rest of his life.
If he decides to just concern
himself with
getting rich, it will be
terrible.
We need a symbolic leader to
say, stop, I
want to get off the greed and
conspicuous
consumption that are sinking
this country.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You're 90.
The book is a story of the last
half-century
or more in Washington and of
this country,
"We Do Our Part: Toward a Fairer
and More
Equal America."
Charlie Peters, thank you very
much.
CHARLES PETERS: Thank you, Judy.
JOHN YANG: Next: It's called a
picnic, but
instead of hotdogs and potato
salad, this
one features poetry and music.
Jeffrey Brown met up with its
creator and
master of ceremonies, poet Paul
Muldoon.
JEFFREY BROWN: There was music
from the Irish
musical duo the lost Brothers,
storytelling
from novelist Nicholson Baker.
NICHOLSON BAKER, Novelist: I was
in a laundromat.
It was a laundromat in
Marseille, France.
Marseille.
Do you hear that?
It's a mattress of a word.
EILEEN MYLES, Poet: This one's
basically talking
to my computer.
JEFFREY BROWN: And there was
poetry by Eileen
Myles.
EILEEN MYLES: You.
After all these years, you
should know my
font.
You should know the numbers go
in the middle.
What'd I say?
JEFFREY BROWN: Muldoon's Picnic
is an old-fashioned
variety show, the brainchild of
poet Paul
Muldoon, held monthly at the
Irish Art Center
in Manhattan.
PAUL MULDOON, Muldoon's Picnic:
While our
drugs of choice were run from
Istanbul through
a girl called Joyce, whose real
name was Mule.
JEFFREY BROWN: So, what's your
role here?
You're sort of the impresario?
PAUL MULDOON: Sort of impish
impresario.
JEFFREY BROWN: Impish, yes.
PAUL MULDOON: Of course,
everyone is stuck
in their own little world these
days.
This has to do with people
making their own
amusement, or at least opening
themselves
to the possibility, I suppose,
of amusement
being of a somewhat more direct
nature, you
know, the poem, the short story,
the song.
JEFFREY BROWN: Muldoon is an
Irish-born, renowned
Pulitzer Prize-winning poet,
Princeton Professor,
poetry editor of "The New
Yorker," and front
man for the band Rogue Oliphant.
The Picnic revives a popular New
York vaudeville
variety show from the 1880s.
But it begins with an even older
tradition
of poetry as an oral art form to
be performed.
PAUL MULDOON: Certainly, in the
Irish tradition,
there is no distinction, for
example, between
the poem and the song.
Many of the great poems in the
Gaelic tradition
were, coincidentally, songs.
JEFFREY BROWN: What's the
difference between
writing lyrics for a song and
writing a poem?
PAUL MULDOON: They're akin as
activities,
but they're distinct.
They're both using words,
obviously.
Now, the song lyric is missing
something.
It's missing an element, which
will bring
it to its -- what it most may be
in the world.
And that's the music.
So, to try to write a song lyric
is difficult
for me, and I think many people,
because,
when I'm writing a poem, my
impulse is to
be perfect, is to achieve
perfection.
JEFFREY BROWN: Which means what?
PAUL MULDOON: Which means that
it is unassailable.
It is -- there is not a word out
of place
in it.
JEFFREY BROWN: And it doesn't
need music to
complete it.
PAUL MULDOON: It doesn't need
music, because
some wise wag once said it
brings its own
music.
JEFFREY BROWN: Muldoon's poetry
is famously
filled with its own music,
metaphors and allusions.
A new selected poems was
recently published.
I asked what effect he strives
for.
PAUL MULDOON: Contrary to what I
think many
people feel, many people feel
art is about
salve, about peace.
I myself am looking for
something quite different.
I'm looking for trouble.
I'm looking for...
JEFFREY BROWN: No rest, not
rest, trouble.
PAUL MULDOON: Well, you know,
trouble is the
mode of the world.
It's the mode of the world, and
to be equal
to the mode of the world, I
think, in a strange
way, to be able to represent
unrest, and to
be able to bring together the
elements, the
chemical components that, when
they combine,
do have some kind of combustion.
JEFFREY BROWN: And at Muldoon's
Picnic, you
can get your poetry with a
musical performance.
From the Irish Art Center in
Manhattan, I'm
Jeffrey Brown for the "PBS
NewsHour."
JOHN YANG: The next performance
of Muldoon's
Picnic will be held in New York
a week from
tonight, on April 10.
Now to our "NewsHour" Shares,
something that
caught our eye that may be of
interest to
you, too.
An image of a man listening to a
gramophone
in his bombed-out Aleppo home
recently went
viral, captured by Agence
France-Presse photographer
Joseph Eid while on assignment
in Syria.
We recently spoke to him via
Skype about the
photo and about the man at its
center.
JOSEPH EID, Agence
France-Presse: Well, Mr.
Mohammed, his full name, it's
Mohammed Mohiedin
Anis.
And they call him Abu Omar.
We saw that this is a very
educated person,
he speaks five languages, he
five years of
medicine in Spain, and he
inherited a great
wealth from his parents.
He's one of the richest, very
wealthy people
of Aleppo.
And Mr. Omar has a very strong
inclination
to collect old and vintage cars,
especially
American-made ones from the '40s
and '50s.
And he told us that how he lost
everything
now and how he was willing to
restart again
from ashes, how an old man, a
70-year-old
man, that he is willing to go
back again and
to reopen his firm and to
restore his house
and to fix his cars, that he
calls they are
injured and they are crying now,
they are
weeping.
And we went also up to the
master bedroom.
When we were there, we barely
could walk amongst
the rubble there inside.
And we asked him.
He's still living there.
He's still sleeping amongst the
rubble.
It's amazing.
I couldn't believe.
Yusef (ph), the videographer,
asked him, the
phonograph is still operating?
He said, "Well, it's the only
thing that still
operates here."
So, he said: "Wait.
I will show you.
I will let you listen to one of
my favorite
discs."
When he ended up explaining
about the song,
he just -- like, he was
transferred.
He was puffing on his pipe and
looking out
from the window.
And he put his one leg over one
another, and
just like he was by himself
listening to the
music, without taking notice
that we are around
him.
That moment, like, I was like
electroshock.
And he didn't notice that I was
taking pictures
of him.
He was like in another era.
He went back to his old good
times, I think.
The destruction, the rubble, the
windows,
and the light even which struck
from the left,
it was so dramatic, you know?
So, it touched me, and I took
the image.
People are fed up from violence,
from killing,
from beheading, from ISIS.
They have been hearing it on a
daily basis.
So, I think this image that it
shows the human
being in Syria, and it gives
also a message
of hope.
He told us: "No matter what
happens to me
or to Syria, I'm not leaving
here.
It's here where I born, and I'm
not leaving."
That's the strong thing about
it, is determination
to live.
JOHN YANG: Tonight on PBS,
"Independent Lens"
presents a film about the
horrific 2012 mass
shooting at Sandy Hook
Elementary School in
Connecticut.
It took the lives of 20 school
children and
six educators.
Newtown uses never-before-heard
testimonies
from parents, siblings,
teachers, and first-responders
as they talk about their grief,
anger and
disbelief in the months and
years after the
media left their small town.
WOMAN: We just kind of waited,
and then they
brought the children out, and it
was heartbreaking
to see them.
They were all holding hands in a
line.
And I saw Michail (ph) come,
and, true to
his personality, I think he was
skipping and
holding somebody's hand.
And he said; "Mom, I didn't cry.
I didn't cry."
And his teacher came behind, and
she had a
wild look on her face, and he
said, "They
heard it all."
She said, "They heard it all.
They heard the guns.
They heard the screaming, but
they heard it
all."
JOHN YANG: "Newtown" premieres
tonight on
most PBS stations.
On the "NewsHour" online right
now, we recently
caught up with Bill Nye, The
Science Guy,
ahead of a major conference of
science teachers.
He talks about encouraging
students' passion
for learning and much more.
You can watch that interview on
our Web site,
PBS.org/NewsHour.
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight.
On Tuesday, we will have a look
at the legal
and ethical issues surrounding
the use of
cameras in the classroom.
Would they better protect
special needs students
and teachers?
I'm John Yang.
Join us online and again here
tomorrow evening.
For all of us here at the "PBS
NewsHour,"
thanks.
See you soon.